docs: add v2023.1 release notes (#2928)
freifunk-gluon/gluon: docs/releases/v2023.1.rst

Gluon 2023.1
============

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to v2023.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2021.1 and later.
This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Extreme Networks

  - WS-AP3805i

ath79-nand
~~~~~~~~~~

- GL.iNet

  - GL-XE300

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - EAP615-Wall

- Wavlink

  - WS-WN572HP3 4G

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - TL-MR6400 (v5)

Features
--------

DNS Caching
~~~~~~~~~~~

> DNS-Caching using the dnsmasq resolver is reintroduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DNS caching using the dnsmasq resolver is reintroduced.
```

> See the :ref:`DNS-Caching documentation <dns-caching>` section for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the :ref:`DNS caching documentation <dns-caching>` section for
```

details on how to enable this feature.

Cellular Modem Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for using cellular data connections as the primary uplink connection has been added
to Gluon. This is supported for hardware that comes with a built-in cellular modem. The required user

> configuration for the APN and SIM-PIN can be performed in the Advanced Settings in Config Mode.

Reviewer 2: The Cellular settings are currently only exposed in the config mode UI if the [gluon-web-cellular](https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/tree/master/package/gluon-web-cellular) package is added manually.

One way to achieve this is to select it as a standard feature:

```make
GLUON_FEATURES_standard := \
	web-cellular \
```

Without this only a configuration via (currently undocumented) uci settings is possible.

Reviewer 2: I'm not quite sure how this should be resolved but i see a few options:

- move my Wiki Entry to docs (i don't like the part about that it's required to add the gluon.cellular section manually) and mention the web-cellular feature
- add the web-cellular feature by default
- suggest adding the web-cellular feature if a community want's to provide that option

I don't like the first two options because they require work and testing. Hoewer, the last and easiest option also isn't elegant and i'm not a fan.

Author: Went with the last option.

Interface Role UI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Interface Roles can now be assigned from the Network page of the Advanced Settings
in Config Mode. This configuration is preserved on Gluon upgrades.

WireGuard Key Translation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release adds a new mechanism for seamlessly translating existing fastd private keys on the nodes into

> WireGuard pendants whose public keys can be **separately** translated on the servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
equivalent WireGuard keys. The corresponding public keys can be translated on the servers separately.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
equivalent WireGuard keys. The corresponding public keys can be translated **separately** on the servers.
```

> This mitigates the need to re-exchange public-keys for communities when migrating to WireGuard-based VPN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mitigates the need to re-exchange public keys for communities when migrating to WireGuard-based VPN.
```

See the :ref:`gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate <gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate>` section for details.

Bugfixes
--------

- Custom channel lists using a radios ``channels`` UCI option are now preserved on upgrade
  in case ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels`` is set.
- Custom HT modes for radios are now preserved when ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``
  is set.

> - Broken mesh links between MediaTek 11ax and Qualcomm 11ac hardware are worked around.

Reviewer: Do we have an issue number or commit we can link? I have no idea what this point means.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/1f09b1594c1eb619aad443e172445df98f2cc137 is the commit
the pr was: https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2905

> Gluon 2022.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gluon 2023.1
```

============

Important notes
---------------

> Upgrades to v2022.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2021.1 and later. This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upgrades to v2023.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2022.1 and later. This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.
```

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Extreme Networks

  - WS-AP3805i

ath79-nand
~~~~~~~~~~

- GL.iNet

  - GL-XE300

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - EAP615-Wall

- Wavlink

  - WS-WN572HP3 4G

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - TL-MR6400 (v5)

Features
--------

> DNS-Caching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DNS Caching
```
I would consistently write this as two words, on the referenced doc page as well.

~~~~~~~~~~~

DNS-Caching using the dnsmasq resolver is reintroduced. This requires configuring the

> caching parameters. See the :ref:`DNS-Caching documentation <dns-caching>` section for

Reviewer: "This requires configuring the caching parameters." might be misunderstood - it is not clear that the configuration is only required to use the caching.

Maybe the link to the doc page is sufficient, and the sentence can just be dropped?

details.

Cellular Modem Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for using cellular data connections as the primary uplink connection has been added

> to Gluon. This is supported for nodes which come with a built-in cellular modem. This feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Gluon. This is supported for devices which come with a built-in cellular modem. This feature
```
or
```suggestion
to Gluon. This is supported for hardware that comes with a built-in cellular modem. This feature
```

> requires user-configuration for the APN which can be performed using the Advanced Settings in

Reviewer: Style: Two sentences starting with "This" in a row, lots of "which". Suggestion:

"The required user configuration for the APN can be performed in the Advanced Settings in Config Mode."

configuration for the APN and SIM-PIN can be performed in the Advanced Settings in Config Mode.

Interface Role UI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Interface Roles can now be assigned from the Network page of the Advanced Settings

> in Config Mode. This configuration is preserved on Gluon
> upgrades.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in Config Mode. This configuration is preserved on Gluon upgrades.
```

> in Config-Mode. These configurations are preserved on automatic or manual Gluon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in Config Mode. This configuration is preserved on Gluon
```

Wireguard Key translation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This release adds a new mechnism for seamlessly translating existing fastd keys on the node
> into predictable Wireguard keys. This allows communities to re-use their fastd key infrastructure
> when migrating to Wireguard-based VPN.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This release adds a new mechanism for seamlessly translating existing fastd private keys on the nodes into WireGuard pendants whose public keys can be **separately** translated on the servers.
This mitigates the need to re-exchange public-keys for communities when migrating to WireGuard-based VPN.
```

> See the :ref:`gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate <gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate>` section for
> details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
See the :ref:`gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate <gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate>` section for details.
```

Bugfixes
--------

> - Custom channel-lists are now preserved on upgrade in case ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Custom channel lists are now preserved on upgrade when ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``
```

>   is set.

Author: Emphasize that this affects channel lists using the radios `channels` option.

> - Custom HT-modes for radios are now preserved in case ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Custom HT modes for radios are now preserved when ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``
```

  is set.

> - Broken mesh-links between MediaTek ax and Qualcomm ac hardware are worked around.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Broken mesh links between MediaTek 11ax and Qualcomm 11ac hardware are worked around.
```

> - Fixed a bug in the MediaTek MT7621 NAND driver which lead to devices end up in a bootlooping state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug in the MediaTek MT7621 NAND driver which led to devices end up in a bootlooping state
```

>   after initial installtion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  after initial installation.
```

> - Fixed a bug in the MediaTek MT7621 NAND driver which led to devices end up in a bootlooping state
>   after initial installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug in the MediaTek MT7621 NAND driver that caused devices to end in a bootlooping state
  after the initial installation.
```

Minor changes
-------------

> - Images built for the ``x86`` targets are now natively bootable with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Images built for the ``x86`` targets are now natively bootable on
```

Gluon 2023.1
============

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to v2023.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2021.1 and later.
This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Extreme Networks

  - WS-AP3805i

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- Ubiquiti

  - NanoBeam 5AC 19 (XC)

```

change from after the point in time when the release notes where prepared

ath79-nand
~~~~~~~~~~

- GL.iNet

  - GL-XE300

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - EAP615-Wall

- Wavlink

  - WS-WN572HP3 4G

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - TL-MR6400 (v5)

Features
--------

DNS Caching
~~~~~~~~~~~

DNS caching using the dnsmasq resolver is reintroduced.

See the :ref:`DNS caching documentation <dns-caching>` section for
details on how to enable this feature.

Cellular Modem Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for using cellular data connections as the primary uplink connection has been added
to Gluon. This is supported for hardware that comes with a built-in cellular modem. The required user
configuration for the APN and SIM-PIN can be performed in the Advanced Settings in Config Mode.

> To use this feature in config-mode, the ``web-cellular`` needs to be enabled in ``site.mk``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use this feature in config-mode, ``web-cellular`` needs to be enabled in ``site.mk``.
```
